Through his prophet Isaiah, Jehovah made a wonderful promise for this being fulfilled today.
We can read about it at Isaiah 60 and verse 17.
Instead of the copper, I will bring in gold.
And instead of the iron, I will bring in silver.
Instead of the wood, copper, and instead of the stones, iron.
And I will appoint peace as your overseers and righteousness as your task assigners.
And all this reference to overseers and task assigners, that sounds like organization, doesn't it?
So what is Jehovah telling us?
He's saying that we can expect to see organizational arrangements getting better and better.
Well, if you've been associated with the truth for a while, I'm sure you'll agree that
Isaiah's prophecy is being fulfilled today.
So for this broadcast, I thought we'd review some of the improvements we've seen just since World War II.
That's the period most of us are familiar with.
Now some of you will be hearing about these things for the first time.
Others will live live through it all.
And for them, it'll bring back fond memories.
So let's go back. It'll be fun.
I call this part, do you remember when?
Before World War II.
And for a number of years after that, many congregations didn't have a kingdom hall of their own.
And they were actually encouraged to meet in private homes or in rented facilities.
The thinking was that if you were in a rented facility or a private home, you had more flexibility.
You could move the meeting place from one place to the other very easily.
But there were problems or a drawbacks.
Sometimes the space would be shared with other organizations.
So you couldn't leave your literature, magazine, speaker stand, and maybe even a sound system in the hall at the end of the meeting.
When the meeting was over, you'd have to pack it all up and take it away.
But that's not all.
Sometimes you had to arrive very early and click the place up after a particularly rowdy group of people had used it.
And if there were cigar smokers in that group, you were in trouble.
It was very difficult to air the place out in time for the meeting.
Now remember, in those days, people could smoke in a private hall.
And you could smoke in an airplane. They could smoke almost anywhere.
So this was a real problem for us.
There were other problems.
Before we had a kingdom hall in my hometown, the congregation met in a rented facility.
Now in October, the place was decorated for Halloween.
And in December, there was a great big Christmas tree on the platform.
We couldn't move it.
And now this was in Canada.
And portraits of the king and queen of England as well as the British flag
were permanent fixtures in the hall.
You couldn't remove any of it for the meeting.
Yet, to their credit, many interested persons attended our meetings.
And to them, it wasn't the meeting place that was important.
It was what they were learning there that counted.
Speaking of our meeting places, at first congregations were on their own when it came to building them.
Now at times, the most a congregation could afford was to purchase the land.
And sometimes, that land would sit there for years,
because it would take years to get the money together to build the hall.
And then, once they had the money together,
were there enough brothers who could take the lead in the construction?
Sometimes on a weekend, you see just one or two brothers working away at the side of the new hall.
They had to love them for their perseverance.
Nowadays, our Kingdom Hall construction is supervised by the LDCs with lots of qualified volunteers
and practical Kingdom Halls can be constructed in a short period of time.
What about the meetings?
For years, the ministry school, service meeting, congregation book study, and watchtower study were all about an hour in length.
So were the public talks when we had them.
Not first, a public talk wasn't scheduled every week.
It would be a series of four or eight talks if you could schedule that many speakers.
And then for a while, the congregation wouldn't have a public talk.
What was that?
Remember, the Theocratic ministry school didn't get underway until 1943,
and it took time for the brothers to develop the skills to deliver an hour talk.
But in time, they were delivering excellent public talks.
And do you remember when we had individual handbills for each public talk,
with the name of the speaker branded on them?
Until 1959, only brothers were enrolled in the school.
For some years, during the first few minutes of the school, there was a rule call.
And the names of all the brothers enrolled in the school were read out.
When your name was read out, you were to answer present.
A few rebels would say, here, but you were supposed to say present.
Now, initially, according to the instructions, if anyone was deliberately and habitually absent
over a period of time, he was dropped from the school.
Later, that was discontinued.
Now, the rule call arrangement got me into a bit of trouble.
You see, in our congregation, when the rule was being called each week,
I noticed that there were a few young brothers who were just a little bit older than I was,
who would answer present.
So one night, after the school, I asked the school servant
if I could have my name read out at the next meeting.
He warmly commanded me, and sure enough, I got my name read out the following week.
Everyone congratulated me after the meeting.
Couldn't understand why. I only said present.
Problem was, I didn't know that when you got your name read out,
you were agreeing to give a talk.
I thought I was just signing up to have my name read out.
Well, a couple of months later, on April the 8th, 1953, I delivered my first eight-minute talk
on the theme, Proclaiming the World's Noom.
Now, why an eight-minute talk? Well, we didn't have Bible readings yet.
So when you were on the school, you were giving an eight-minute talk.
Well, today, we make sure everyone understands what's involved in being a student in the midweek meeting.
In 1950, we received the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures in English,
and we were encouraged to bring it to the meetings.
So for the Hebrew Scriptures, you'd have the American Standard Version or the Ting James Version,
mostly the American Standard Version because it had Jehovah's name.
So you'd have two Bibles to bring to the meeting.
There's the one for the Hebrew Scriptures, and then the New World Translation for the Greek Scriptures.
Two Bibles, it wasn't too bad.
But later, the New World Translation of the Hebrew Scriptures was released in installments.
So you'd get a volume every year or two, and as we received each new volume,
we were encouraged to bring it to the meeting.
How in time, those volumes started to pile up.
So that by 1960, you might have volumes one through five of the Hebrew Scriptures,
and the Greek Scriptures, and your regular study aids,
and we had thick study aids in those days.
We had big briefcases and strong backs in those days.
We were really happy to get the complete New World Translation in just one volume in 1961.
Well, let's say a word about music. That's something that's near and dear to my heart.
For many years, it was left up to the local servants to decide which songs the congregation would sing at the meeting.
So the chairman of a particular meeting would select the songs.
But his choice wasn't always final.
Many Kingdom Halls had a piano or some other instrument to accompany the singing,
but often the musician couldn't play all the songs in the book.
So we'd have to sing the songs he could play.
We got to know those few songs really well,
but those humble musicians did their best to accompany our singing.
As a result of all this, the words to those songs we sang nearly 70 years ago
still come readily to mind.
Do you remember the written review? Maybe you don't.
Congregations periodically had a written review of material that had been covered in the ministry school over the previous weeks.
We had a half hour to answer about 25 questions.
But then when the half hour was up, we would write our name on the paper,
hand it into the school servant,
and he would take all the papers home to grade them.
Now, if there were 25 questions, you'd get four points a piece for each correct answer, a hundred points total.
And then a week later, he'd return the papers to us at the meeting.
Now, in the early years of the arrangement, I remember well.
He'd announced the highest and lowest grade to the congregation.
Well, thankfully, he didn't mention the names of the one who got the highest and lowest score.
Well, later that arrangement to announce the highest and lowest grade was discontinued.
Do you remember when circuit assemblies began on Friday evening and continued through Sunday afternoon?
A full program was presented Saturday afternoon and evening.
There was never a dull moment on Saturday night.
There were lively demonstrations that kept our interest right up to the end of the program.
Sometimes the sets were very elaborate.
For example, suppose a publisher was demonstrating a presentation from door to door.
Not today, we just imagine there was a door.
But back then, at the circuit assembly, there might be a frame with a painted door on the stage,
and maybe even a doorbell for the publisher to ring.
Now, if the householder was supposed to be interested, you knew it,
because the house number was 777.
And if the householder was going to be opposed, you knew that as well,
because the house number would be 666.
Now, on one program I remember, the publisher knocks on the door,
and a brother dressed as a priest answers.
He puts up a real argument about the Trinity.
Talk about visual aids, but you never forgot what you saw and heard.
And do you remember when each congregation had a congregation servant,
and up to seven other servants, the assistant congregation servant,
the Bible study servant, the account servant, the watchtower study servant,
the magazine territory servant, the literature servant,
and the ministry school servant?
Now, about time, apart from book study conductors,
you couldn't have more than eight servants in the congregation.
So, unless someone moved, a young man had no chance of becoming a servant.
So, how could a young man reach out for more responsibility?
And, how would the prophecy recorded at Micah 55 ever be fulfilled?
There, Jehovah promised, we will raise up against him seven shepherds,
yes, eight princes of mankind.
While seven represents completeness, so eight princes,
I would indicate that there would be more than enough men in the congregations
to provide theocratic direction.
But how could that be when there was basically a limit of eight servants for congregation?
The answer came in 1971.
We were thrilled when we understood that each congregation has a body of elders,
and there was no set number of elders or ministerial servants,
as many as are qualified, can be appointed.
Now, when I was baptized 66 years ago,
it didn't have to be approved for baptism by the congregation.
And the only questions asked of baptism candidates were the two they answered
at the conclusion of the baptism talk.
That led to a few strange situations.
On a few occasions, much of the surprise of the servants,
someone would rush up to the front of the hall at the end of the baptism talk,
answer the two questions, and get baptized.
Something more was needed.
Assurance that the individual really knew what he was doing,
and especially that he was living in harmony with scriptural principles.
So, in 1967, questions were provided
so that the responsible brothers could be assured that each candidate
was truly qualified for baptism.
Those questions have been refined over the years,
and today, we go over some 60 questions with baptism candidates.
The copper has turned to gold.
Do you remember when there were very few pictures in our publications?
And the few we had, usually in black and white, are only two colors.
Today, our spiritual food is served in attractive publications in full color.
Now, those of us who have served in four language congregations will also remember
when a new publication in English might not be available in another language for several years.
Study articles, trailed by several months.
That's before it became possible for the branches to do simultaneous printing.
Here's how it worked.
Material in English would be mailed to the branches,
regular mail, for translation.
And if the translators had a question about the meaning of a sentence in English,
they would use regular mail to send their question to headquarters.
In time, headquarters would answer back by regular mail.
And this back and forth, it could take quite a while,
and in some countries, mail service was poor.
Now, today, thanks to special computer programs or brothers have developed
and the ability to communicate electronically and some other factors,
we're able to release most language editions simultaneously with the English.
What, an improvement?
Now, speaking of our literature,
do you realize that it's been some 31 years since the decision was made that in the United States,
we'd no longer ask for a contribution for our literature?
Later, the arrangement was extended worldwide.
That's been a real blessing for our brothers.
For example, when we were asking for contributions for literature,
some brothers in Africa and other places couldn't afford to have a watchtower
for every member of the family.
They were just too poor.
And what about bomb books?
Tell you an experience in one African country.
A missionary noticed that a young brother quoted a wide variety of scriptures in his comments.
And he got curious. One day he asked the young brother,
how did you come to know so many scriptures?
The brother replied, it's the reasoning book.
I read it every chance I get.
The missionary asked him, what do you mean you read it every chance you get?
Well, he replied, I don't have a reasoning book myself.
I could never afford one.
But I know a sister who has one.
And she lets me borrow it from time to time.
I read it every chance I get.
Well, you can imagine.
The missionary went out and bought him a reasoning book
and a new world translation for good measure.
It was a great investment.
The young brother was later called into Bethel.
And where do you think he was assigned?
To the literature department.
The brother's new.
He appreciated the literature so much
that he had made sure the congregations had the literature they needed.
Well, looking back,
we can see that the arrangements back then served a purpose.
They were like fine copper.
We do not look down on them.
Rather, we take the view expressed at Zechariah 4.10.
Who has despised the day of small beginnings?
There was those taking the lead to saw a better way of doing things.
They didn't hesitate to make adjustments.
That's very faith strengthening.
And the best is yet to come.
As I mentioned in the beginning,
this may be the first time that some of you have heard about these things.
Why not ask someone who has been in the truth for many years?
What it was like when he was new in the truth?
That could lead to a very stimulating discussion.